Heraclitus of Ephesus: Selected Fragments

THE PATH OF INVESTIGATION

1. Although this Logos is eternally valid, yet men are
unable to understand it -- not only before hearing it, but
even after they have heard it for the first time. That is to
say, although all things come to pass in accordance with
this Logos, men seem to be quite without any experience
of it - at least if they are judged in the light of such words
and deeds as I am here setting forth.

2. We should let ourselves be guided by what is common
to all. Yet, although the Logos is common to all, most
men live as if each of them had a private intelligence of
his own.

3. Men who love wisdom should acquaint themselves
with a great many particulars.

4. Seekers after gold dig up much earth and find little.

5. Let us not make arbitrary conjectures about the
greatest matters.

6. Much learning does not teach understanding, otherwise
it would have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, Xenophanes
and Hecataeus.

7. Of those whose discourses I have heard there is not
one who attains to the realization that wisdom stands
apart from all else.

8.. I have searched myself.

9. It pertains to all men to know themselves and to be
temperate.

10. To be temperate is the greatest virtue. Wisdom
consists in speaking and acting the truth, giving heed to
the nature of things.

11.. The things of which there can be sight, hearing, and
learning ---- these are what I especially prize.

12. Eyes are more accurate witnesses than ears.

13. Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men having
barbarian souls.

14. One should not act or speak as if he were asleep.

15. The waking have one world. in common, whereas
each sleeper turns away to a private world of his own.

16. Whatever we see when awake is death; when asleep,
dreams.

17. Nature loves to hide itself.

18. The lord whose oracle is at Delphi neither speaks nor
conceals, but gives signs.

19. Unless you expect the unexpected you will never find
truth, for it is hard to discover and hard to attain.

THE IDEA OF THE CONTINUUM

20. Everything flows and nothing abides;. Everything
gives way and nothing stays fixed.

21. You cannot step twice into the same river, for other
waters and yet others go ever flowing on.

22. Cool things become warm, the warm grows cool; the
moist dries, the parched becomes moist.

23. It is in changing that things find repose. 

24. Time is a child moving counters in a game; the royal
power is a child's.

25. War is both father and king of all; some he has shown
forth as gods and others as men, some he has made slaves
and others free.

26. It should be understood that war is the common
condition, that strife is justice, and that all things come to
pass through the compulsion of strife.

27. Homer was wrong in saying, "Would that strife might
perish from amongst gods and men. For if that were to
occur, then all things would cease to exist.

ON NATURE

28. There is exchange of all things for fire and of fire for
all things, as there is of wares for gold and of gold for
wares.

29. This universe, which is the same for all, has not been
made by any god or man, but it always has been is, and
will be -- an ever-living fire, kindling itself by regular
measures and going out by regular measures.

30. The phases of fire are craving and satiety.

31. It throws apart and then brings together again; it
advances and retires.

32. The transformations of fire -- first, sea; and of sea,
half becomes earth and half the lightning-flash.

33. When earth has melted into sea, the resultant amount
is the same as there had been before sea became hardened
into earth.

34. Fire lives in the death of earth, air in the death of fire,
water in the death of air, and earth in the death of water.

35. The thunderbolt pilots all things.

36 The sun is new each day.

37. The sun is the breadth of a man's foot.

38. If there were no sun, the other stars would not suffice
to prevent its being night.

39. The boundary line of evening and morning is the
Bear; and opposite the Bear is the boundary of bright
Zeus.

40. The fairest universe is but a heap of rubbish piled up
at random.

41. Every beast is driven to pasture by a blow.

ON THE SPIRITUAL

42. You could not discover the limits of soul, even if you
traveled by every path in order to do so; such is the depth
of its meaning.

43. Soul is the vaporization out of which everything else
is composed; more-over it is the least corporeal of things
and is in ceaseless flux, for the moving world can only be
known by what is in motion.

44. Souls are vaporized from what is moist.

45. Soul has its own inner law of growth.

46. A dry soul is wisest and best. (or) The best and wisest
soul is a dry beam of light.

47. Souls take pleasure in becoming moist.

48. A drunken man has to be led by a boy, whom he
follows stumbling and not knowing whither he goes, for
his soul is moist.

49. It is death to souls to become water, and it is death to
water to become earth. Conversely, water comes into
existence out of earth, and souls out of water. (36)
50. Even the sacred barley drink separates when it is not
stirred.

51. It is hard to fight against impulsive desire; whatever it
wants it will buy at the cost of the soul.

52. It would not be better if things happened to men just
as they wish.

53. Although it is better to hide our ignorance, this is hard
to do when we relax over wine.

54. A foolish man is a-flutter at every word.

55. Fools, although they hear, are like the deaf: To them
the adage applies that when present they are absent.

56. Bigotry is the sacred disease. 

57. Most people do not take heed of the things they
encounter, nor do they grasp them even when they have
learned about them, although they think they do.

58. If all existing things were smoke, it is by smell that
we would distinguish them.

59. In Hades souls perceive by smelling.

60. Corpses are more fit to be thrown out than dung.

ON THE DIVINE

61. Human nature has no real understanding; only the
divine nature has it.

62. Man is not rational; there is intelligence only in what
encompasses him.

63. What is divine escapes men's notice because of their
incredulity.

64. Although intimately connected with the Logos, men
keep setting themselves against it.

65. As in the nighttime a man kindles for himself
(haptetai) a light, so when a living man lies down in
death with his vision extinguished he attaches himself
(haptetai) to the state of death; even as one who has been
awake lies down with his vision extinguished and
attaches himself to the state of Sleep.

66. Immortals become mortals, mortals become
immortals; they live in each other's death and die in each
other's life.

6?. There await men after death such things as they
neither expect nor have any conception of.

68. They arise into wakefulness and become guardians of
the living and the dead.

69. A man's character is his guardian divinity.

70. Greater dooms win greater destinies.

71. Justice will overtake fabricators of lies and false
witnesses.

72. Fire in its advance will catch all things by surprise
and judge them.

73. How can anyone hide from that which never sets?

74. (When visitors unexpectedly found Heraclitus
warming himself by the cooking fire) Here, too, are gods.

75. They pray to images, much as if they were to talk to
houses; for they do not know what gods and heroes are.

76. Night-walkers, magicians, bacchantes, revelers, and
participants in the mysteries What are regarded as
mysteries among men are unholy rituals.

77. Their processions and their phallic hymns would be
disgraceful exhibitions were it not that they are done in
honor 0[[sterling]] Dionysos. But Dionysos in whose
honor they rave and hold revels, is the same as Hades.

78e When defiled they purify themselves with blood, as
though one who had stepped into filth were to wash
himself with filth. If any of his fellow-men should
perceive him acting in such a way, they would regard him
as mad.

79. The Sibyl with raving mouth utters solemn,
unadorned, unlovely words, but she reaches out over a
thousand years with her voice because of the god within
her. 

COUNSELS

80. Thinking is common to all.

81. Men should speak with rational mind and thereby
hold strongly to that which is shared in common ---- as a
city holds on to its law, and even more strongly. For all
human laws are nourished by the one divine law, which
prevails as far as it wishes, suffices for all things, and yet
is something more than they are.

82. The people should fight for their law as for their city
wall.

83. Law involves obeying the counsel of one.

84. To me one man is worth ten thousand if he is firstrate.

85. The best of men choose one thing in preference to all
else, immortal glory in preference to mortal good;
whereas the masses simply glut themselves like cattle.

86. Gods and men honor those slain in battle.

87. Even those who are most in repute know and
maintain only what is reputed.

88. To extinguish hybris is more needed than to
extinguish a fire.

89. It is weariness to keep toiling at the same things so
that one becomes ruled by them.

90. Dogs bark at a person whom they do not know.

91. What sort of mind or intelligence have they? They
believe popular folk-tales and follow the crowd as their
teachers, ignoring the adage that the many are bad, the
good are few.

92. Men are deceived in their knowledge of things that
are manifest, even as Homer was who was the wisest of
all the Greeks. For he was even deceived by boys killing
lice when they said to him: What we have seen and
grasped, these we leave behind; whereas what we have
not seen and grasped, these we carry away."

93. Homer deserves to be thrown out of the contests and
flogged and Archilochus too.

94. Hesiod distinguishes good days and evil days, not
knowing that every day is like every other.

95. The Ephesians had better go hang themselves, every
man of them, and leave their city to be governed by
youngsters, for they have banished Hermadorus, the
finest man among them, declaring: "Let us not have
anyone among us who excels the rest; if there should be
such a one, let him go and live else-where."

96. May you have plenty of wealth, you men of Ephesus,
in order that you may be punished for your evil ways

97. After birth men have the wish to live and to accept
their dooms; then they leave behind them children to
become dooms in their turn.

THIS PARADOXICAL UNIVERSE

98. Opposition brings concord. Out of discord comes the
fairest harmony. 

99. It is by disease that health is pleasant, by evil that
good is pleasant, by hunger satiety, by weariness rest.

100. Men would not have known the name of justice if
these things had not occurred.

101. Sea water is at once very pure and very foul: it is
drinkable and healthful for fishes, but undrinkable and
deadly for men.

102. Donkeys would prefer hay to gold.

103. Pigs wash in mud, and domestic fowls in dust or
ashes.

104. The handsomest ape is ugly compared with
humankind; the wisest man appears as an ape when
compared with a god --- in wisdom, in beauty, and in all
other ways.

105. Man is regarded as childish by a spirit (daemon),
just as a boy is by a man.

106. To God all things are beautiful, good, and right.
Men, on the other hand, deem some things right and
others wrong.

107. Doctors cut, burn, and torture the sick, and then
demand of them an undeserved fee for such services.

108. The way up and the way down are one and the same.

109. In the circumference of the circle the beginning and
the end are common.

110. Into the same rivers we step and do not step. (49a)
Ill. For wool-carders the straight and the winding way are
one and the same.

112. The bones connected by joints are at once a unitary
whole and not a unitary whole. To be in agreement is to
differ; the concordant is the discordant. From out of all
the many particulars comes oneness, and out of oneness
comes all the many particulars.

113. It is one and the same thing to be living and dead,
awake or asleep, young or old. The former aspect in each
case becomes the latter, and the latter becomes the
former, by sudden unexpected reversal.

114. Hesiod, whom so many accept as their wise teacher,
did not even understand the nature of day and night; for
they are one.

115. The name of the bow is life, but its work is death.

116. The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.

117. People do not understand how that which is at
variance with itself agrees with itself. There is a harmony
in the bending back, as in the cases of the bow and the
lyre.

118. Listening not to me but to the Logos, it is wise to
acknowledge that all things are one.

119. Wisdom is one and unique; it is unwilling and yet
willing to be called by the name of Zeus. 

120. Wisdom is one ---- to know the intelligence by
which all things are steered through all things.

121. God is day and night, winter and summer, war and
peace, satiety But he undergoes transformations, just as
(............) when mixed with is named according to the
particular aroma which it gives off.

122. The sun will not overstep his measures; if he were to
do so, the Erinnyes, handmaidens of justice, would seek
him out for punishment.

123. All things come in their due season. 

124. Even sleepers are workers and collaborators in what.
goes on in the universe
Return to Philosophy index
William Harris
